chronic sleep deprivation has
system-wide effects
sleep affects every organ system and
every disease state let's be very clear
here cancer cells multiply faster the
more sleep-deprived you are
hey everybody welcome to health theory
today we have a very special episode for
you we've got not one but two amazing
minds with us first is clinical
psychologist dr michael bruce known as
the sleep doctor he's one of the
youngest people to pass the board and
his expertise has seen him featured on
countless high-profile shows including
oprah live with kelly and ryan the early
show and about 40 appearances on dr oz
second we have dr jason mccune an
accomplished neurologist ceo of medical
device startup neurovalence a good
friend of mine and the creator of what
could be a revolutionary new sleep
device modius sleep
gentlemen welcome to the show thanks for
having us very good to have you both
here
and we're going to be talking all about
sleep and we were just talking briefly
about sleep efficiency yes so well full
disclosure i'm on the board of
neurovalence so everybody should know
but i hate sleep and i actually want
less sleep not more and the first time
that i tried your device when it was for
weight loss it made me sleep more which
actually pissed me off but then you
started getting obsessed with it as
something that could help with that so
that i want to start with sleep
efficiency sure so
other than something like a device what
can we do to be more efficient with our
sleep so that we don't need as much of
it so
let me tell you a little bit about my
experience personally and how i became
much more efficient at my own sleep so
i'd go to bed around 11 30 i'd get up
around 6 30 7 o'clock seven and a half
hours eight hours thought i was doing
okay but what i discovered was um that i
wasn't following something called my
chronotype so people out there may or
may not have heard of the term
chronotype but it's early bird night owl
turns out there's not two there's
actually four of them and my chronotype
is a night owl
so one of the things that i discovered
is if i go to bed at my chrono typed
time
and i'm super duper consistent about it
my entire sleep schedule begins to
shrink so there's four
non-rem stages of sleep stages one two
three and four and then there's rem they
all actually do different things but
stage two in particular makes up about
fifty percent of the night and so that's
the one that if you start to squelch it
down your entire sleep total sleep time
begins to shrink and that's really where
a lot of these efficiencies come in i'm
not saying that stage two is worthless
because it's certainly not but at the
end of the day if you can get less stage
two it actually shrinks your entire sky
so walk me through the four stages
what's going on in those stages exactly
so stage one is a transitionary stage
right it's just going from wake and
getting into sleep it really doesn't
take very long maybe three to four
percent of the night maximum so if you
wake up you have to kind of get into
stage one to go back into stage two
stage two makes up anywhere from
45 to 50 percent of the night so this is
the biggest stage that you have stage
three and four are actually combined
together and this is your physical
restoration so this is where the largest
amount of growth hormone is emitted
during stage 3 for sleep and to be clear
stage 3 for sleep is mostly at the
beginning of the night whoever decided
and designed this whole thing
did it for a particular reason that
stage 3 and 4 sleep at the beginning of
the night helps with physical
restoration that way if god forbid you
know you got to get up after three hours
your body will still function right the
latter part of the night is where we see
a lot of rem sleep which is the probably
the most popular stage of sleep because
people have either you know heard about
it from dreaming or things like things
of that nature and rem sleep is really
your mental restoration so this is
really where a bunch of different things
happen one is you move information from
your short-term memory to your long-term
memory during rem sleep
also believe it or not your brain is
more active during rem than in any other
stage so when i was looking at my sleep
and trying to consolidate it a bit more
the stage that had the largest amount
that didn't do the things that were
super duper critical was stage two so
that was the kind of the stage i wanted
to see if i could you know scrunch it
down a little bit what i discovered was
if i went to bed at the time for my
chronotype and i was consistent so
that's one of the big things i want
everybody out there to know is it's
consistency in your sleep schedule that
will begin to consolidate your sleep why
is that why is consistency so important
so here's what my theory on it is is
historically we've always been told
eight hours eight hours eight hours
that's really not necessarily what
everybody needs we really need roughly
six
maybe five 5 45 to 6 15 in terms of
total sleep but in order to get those
stages if you don't go to bed at the
right time for your chronotype it takes
eight hours to get them all
if i go to bed at midnight without an
alarm i wake up at 6 17 every [__]
morning it's ridiculous i mean i'm the
sleep doctor and i sleep six hours and
15 minutes a night right like how can
that be good my body doesn't sleep
longer than that because of the
consistency of my sleep all right dr
mccune you and i have gone back and
forth on this because you know my fury
was sleep i [__] hate it and you also
know my obsession with living forever
and you've sent me articles basically
trying to convince me that if i really
want to live forever that i need to get
more sleep even though i do not use an
alarm
i have not used an alarm in any
consistent fashion in
probably more than 15 years
you sent me an article one time that
said if you read this you'll get eight
hours a night every night like you'll
[__] break yourself in half to make
it happen
so i actually didn't read the article
because it freaked me out so
do you agree with that because you were
nodding
so i think you need to take a step back
and just ask the question why does the
body even need sleep
and if you actually think like you know
right across
evolution for millions and millions of
years we hone down every part of our
body i mean think of what the human body
can now do i mean we've just run a
marathon in under two hours like it is
the most efficient machine ever but yet
every night we need to lie down and
effectively become unconscious for a
period of six days or whatever hours
so you know to say that actually sleep
is maybe not that important it's crazy
to think that if you look at what
happens when you have
restricted sleep i mean it literally
just feeds into every health issue that
we have every epidemic is potentially
connected to having bad sleep now as dr
bruce was saying
you as an individual i mean generally
we're saying you know sort of let's say
68 hours or whatever but you as an
individual just need to get the right
amount of sleep in the right way for you
we're gonna have to define that so it's
genetic yeah how much oh a large part of
it's genetic if you look at people's
genetic makeup i mean you can i do sleep
genetics on people all the time i can
take somebody's 23andme data i can run
it through an algorithm and i can tell
you almost exactly how much sleep your
body needs what are you looking at
there's 74 different sleep markers i'm
looking at the per 3 gene in particular
so if you look at for a snip which is a
single nucleotide polymorphism or a
genetic variation basically if one of
the building blocks of your dna is out
of order it can make you into an early
bird it can make you into a night owl it
can make you into an insomniac or it can
make you into a kind of in the middle
and see and he's exactly right you need
the amount of sleep for you i hate
general recommendations you know where
eight hours actually came from so study
done at stanford in the 40s
okay i think our whole universe has
changed quite a bit since then so when
we start to look at it
i would argue that everybody has a
different individual sleep need
yours might be six his might be seven
mine might be eight right if you don't
get what you need your body is not going
to function again some people hit the
genetic lottery and they only need five
and a half hours that's great for them
but if i got five and a half hours
i'd be a mess so without genetic testing
what do you recommend that people do
like what i always tell people to do is
just sleep without an alarm for a very
long time and correct me if i'm wrong it
really does feel like you need to catch
up on sleep
so i completely disagree with all of
that and let me tell you why so there's
a very easy experiment that people can
do at home to figure out exactly how
much sleep they need so most people have
a socially determined wake-up time right
in my house it's around 6 30. so when
the dogs start getting up i got to wake
up my kids things like that so we know
that the average sleep cycle is 90
minutes long we know that the average
individual has five of these sleep
cycles right five times 90 is 450
minutes divided by 60 is seven and a
half hours okay so first of all eight
hours is a myth because the math doesn't
even work right i mean the math doesn't
make sense so what i do is i take that 6
30 wake up time and i count backwards
seven and a half hours and i tell people
okay go to bed at 11 and see how it
works so i did this experiment on myself
now literally a minute ago i told
everybody that i go to bed at midnight i
wake up at 6 17. so michael what are you
talking about so i ran the experiment
and it didn't work it failed miserably
on me and i'm the guy who's creating the
experiment right so i went to bed at 11
i woke up at 5 30
went to bed 11 woke up at 5 30 again to
be clear i'm a night owl okay so what i
decided to do was move my bedtime from
11 to 12 and as soon as i did that i
woke up at 6 30.
aha so what did i learn about that i was
tracking my sleep and i discovered
number one i don't have as long a sleep
cycle as 90 minutes there's individual
differences there and when i was waking
up without an alarm similar to yourself
i had tons of energy i felt good
everything worked out well and i did two
things i shifted my schedule so it
matched my chrono type of a night owl
and my sleep began to consolidate
because i naturally allowed my body to
fall asleep and to wake up
yeah one of the more interesting things
i've heard you talk about is the story
that you tell about the woman who went
into her boss and said hey can i just
run an experiment or did they did you
get on the phone with them oh yeah it
was crazy so so the way i got interested
in circadian rhythmicity and all the
power of when and chronotypes and all
that was i had a patient who i couldn't
fix
like she came to me she was terrible
insomniac and she couldn't fall asleep
and she was trying to get up and she was
dragging ass at work she was getting in
fights with her husband like it was a
mess right and we tried cognitive
behavioral therapy we tried sleep
restriction you know all the classic
clinical psychologists who's a sleep
specialist kind of things and i failed
at every one of them and so i brought
her back in and i was like let's think
through this and she told me something
that really kind of
pinged me off and she said well i feel
like if i could just go to bed at one
and sleep until you know eight or nine
she said i think i'd be fine and i was
like tell me more about that and we
started to go down that path and she was
like yeah i think i'm i've always been a
night owl my mom told me never to take
early classes in college things like
that and so i said well do you think
your boss would ever let us just run the
experiment and she said i'm going to be
honest with you i think i'm going to get
fired so i said well can i call him she
said have at it so i literally i call
her boss and i'm like dude this is what
i think is going on will you let me run
the experiment and he said i'm firing
her on friday whoa
no pressure right
no michael's not in a in a pressure
cooker at this one and i'm like all
right fine let's go for it this was on a
monday i talked to her on friday she
said i could call him on monday and so i
said i want her to come in at ten
o'clock and i don't want her to leave
until you know six or seven are you are
you cool with that he was like whatever
you want we did it for a week i called
on friday and it was really interesting
what he said to me it picks up the phone
i was like you know how's it going he
was like i have three other employees
can you work with them that was the
first words out of his mouth
there are 15 percent of the population
are early birds 15 of the population are
night owls and 10 of the population are
insomniacs every employer out there
has these people
in their mix
and they're not capitalizing on them
they're not utilizing them when they
when they would be most efficient that's
what chronotypes did yeah that's really
interesting to me so one thing i have
found as a kid i would have told you i'm
a thousand percent of night owl
at one point in my early 20s i was
unemployed and so i stayed up late one
night and woke up later i stayed up
later woke up later literally until i
had to set an alarm to make a 10 p.m
movie
and i was like whoa and i started to
feel super weird i was out of rhythm
with the world total which is more
bizarre than you think it's going to be
and so at that point in my life it's
pretty clear i was a night owl now
i am like
desperate to go to bed around like 8 30
i'm like do i really need to stay up
until nine so i never read anywhere
you're the first person i've heard say
that like that level of consistency is
important and that helps you shrink your
time but because my wife isn't going to
be happy if i'm going to bed early and
i've sort of twisted her arm to go to
bed consistently at 9 00 pm i go to bed
at nine even when i'm tired earlier um
but
that to me is weird that i went from
like the ultimate extreme night owl
having to set my alarm to make a 10 p.m
movie to now it's like
my typical sleep pattern is from like
nine to three or nine to four
so first of all that makes perfect sense
to me right so here's what's interesting
is as humans we go through almost all
the chrono types
so one person will go through all the
chronos yeah so think about when you
have a baby what do babies do they go to
bed early and they wake up really early
they're early birds what happens when
your children are middle schoolers they
go to bed at you know i don't know 8 30
9 o'clock and they get up at you know
regular time 6 30 7 o'clock what do
teenagers do i have two of them it sucks
right what do they do they stay up until
midnight one o'clock in the morning and
it's hell to wake them up so
look at the progression right then what
happens is around 20 22 depending upon
who you are your chronotype stabilizes
and it stays stable until you're about
55 60. and a lot of times what happens
is you start to go earlier right and so
the reason that they had that you see a
lot of the old people at the diner at
five o'clock right is because their
circadian rhythm is telling them to eat
earlier because they're going to be
going to bed at 8 30. now is there
circadian rhythm starting to
break
like oh no wha what would make it shift
with age though
so it's a biological phenomenon that
seems to occur for people as as the
aging process occurs
there's different things that happen
probably the biggest one i would argue
is melatonin production changes over the
course of time right and so when you
look at melatonin production in anybody
who's 50 plus what you start to see is a
decrease in melatonin production and
your circadian rhythm again starts to
fluctuate based on this hormone change
that occurs based on age so that's
probably the biggest factor as to why
that occurs and of course with
developing children they don't have all
the hormones when they're babies and so
they start in one spot and then they get
more and they get more and it just
travels interesting okay
jason talk to me about like the brain
itself what is happening so what happens
with shrinking the brain and getting rid
of the toxins and the detoxification
process and all of that and
do you worry about that if somebody is
doing something like this where it's
optimizing your sleep it's crushing the
second part of the sleep cycle and
they're getting less sleep than they may
otherwise get
do you worry that the brain isn't able
to get rid of the debris and all that
stuff
for sure but even before you you go into
the higher level sort of the cortex and
the brain you know the actual
start of all this would be i'm sure
you're familiar and the listeners will
be familiar with the autonomic nervous
system so the sort of stress response
and the vagus you know vagus nerve
stimulation a really popular thing and
that's all in the brain stem and it's
the brain stem that really controls all
these kind of automatic processes that
you don't really think about you know so
as i'm chatting here and i am holding
this cup that's this top part of my
brain making that decision but while i'm
doing that i'm not thinking about how
many breaths i take i'm not thinking
about my heartbeat
if i were if i had to think about that
and something scared me i'd forget and
i'd like pass out and similarly all
these other processes that are automatic
circadian rhythm is one of them actually
starts in the brain stem
so there are multiple nuclei in that
area and even right up into another area
called the hypothalamus it's kind of
the one if you're going to pick one
control center it's it's the
hypothalamus
and that's really fast not to derail
your point but really fast give me some
of the things that the hypothalamus
controls because the first time you
broke these down for me i was like what
like the list is crazy yeah i mean it is
literally crazy i mean just even the
things we are interested in so on on the
metabolic side you've got like appetite
satiety even things like your cravings
you've also got your metabolic rate
you've got how much thyroid hormones
released you know and actually at a top
level it controls things like cortisol
and growth hormone and even insulin
sensitivity leptin sensitivity that's
just on the metabolic side then you've
got all these other things like thermal
regulation you've got mood you've got
wakefulness you've got you know your
your sleep states you've got circadian
rhythm i mean it literally goes on and
on and on and on so you know you're just
saying about sort of sleep health and
how the brain works and how it sort of
click i suppose
regenerates or what's the point of sleep
and how does it all start so it's
actually that kind of core issue um now
a lot of the reason i'm saying this is a
lot of people think it's actually this
kind of top layer so you know you've got
your cortex and my memories in my mood
and things that make me excited are all
kind of up here and people sometimes
confuse you know having a kind of racing
mind with actually bad sleep so they go
and put the head in the pillow and
they're like anxious about something
that happened and they think that's like
the kind of core cause of the bad sleep
so the solution would be let's take some
sleeping tablets and just sedate the
brain but actually that is the worst
possible thing that you could do because
you've actually just ignored the problem
which is down in the brain stem and
hypothalamus you've just sedated your
brain at the top you'll get sleep it
might not be the greatest in fact you
can almost guarantee it's going to be
terrible sleep and then the next morning
you wake up why is it terrible are we
disrupting something and dr bruce maybe
this is a better question for you
pharmaceutically based sleep and natural
sleep are two different animals what is
happening that makes pharmaceutically
inducedly problematic so it depends upon
the pharmaceutical okay right so let's
use historic benzodiazepine so resteril
xanax valium the the historic sleeping
pills they literally obliterate stage
three for sleep i mean they almost knock
it out completely right that's kind of a
problem is that why you were saying that
uh pharmaceuticals are tied to
alzheimer's exactly so one of the big
well and so only some pharmaceuticals
believe it or not some over-the-counters
are also tied to alzheimer's there's a
lot of data what are they using they use
benadryl basically diphenhydramine so
anything that's got a pm on the end of
it right has got the analgesic plus
benadryl right and when you get hooked
on them and you have to take them all
the time to help you with your sleep
they don't allow for stage three for
sleep which is again that cleaning
system that glymphatic system that pulls
tau and all these other proteins that
we're now learning or leading to
alzheimer's
it pulls them out so if you're taking a
pill that doesn't allow the garbage to
be taken out of your brain it just
doesn't seem like a great idea
all right so going back to the
hypothalamus you had this whole
hypothesis around stimulating um the
hypothalamus by going through the
vestibular nerve
why would that work so one
help us understand the mechanism of why
the that nerve actually stimulates the
hypothalamus and then why what why isn't
it blind stimulation which is to an
ignorant person like myself is exactly
what a sound seems like you're just
[__] zapping it um so how did you get
specific and you
what have you done to the new device to
make it actually for
sleep and not
the weight loss component which is what
you were focused on before okay bear
with me i'm going to go back into
neuroscience a little bit
please so a lot of people as i said
would be familiar with the vagus nerve
vagus nerve stimulation has been around
for 30 plus years in a really crude
sense you get like a pacemaker almost
you put it in actually into the pec in
below the back muscle attached to the
vagus nerve in the neck and then
actually the vagus nerve carries the
signal up to the brain stem what's that
used for
the first device was for epilepsy okay
which is really interesting because is
it effective with that bulbs yeah yeah
that was after 30 years ago so you know
having a seizure say up in the cortical
areas you can actually send the signal
from pretty much from your pec muscle
into a nerve up to the brain stem
through the brain stem right up into the
cortex and actually you know stop a
seizure propagating that's unbelievable
it's actually unbelievable like it's not
even that close in in anatomical terms
that's quite a distance to do that
uh so that technology then evolved over
you know let's say the last 30 years
there are now devices for
um like mental health for anxiety and
depression uh more recently actually
they've looked at systemic diseases
there's a company working on
inflammation so like arthritis and
crohn's disease always stimulating the
brain stem the hypothalamus
you know i always find it strange that
you know the body is literally me it's
particularly the nervous system of
nothing but electrochemical reactions i
mean every memory emotion everything
that i do every touch feeling even all
of this that is a chain of little wisps
of electrical signals throughout the
brain and the brainstem and then some
weird evolutionary sense somehow that's
come together and has given us this
conscious form and what is a symphony of
we decided to call it life you know but
it is all electrical stimulation um but
yet the go-to to treat this is to take
drugs it seems almost counterintuitive
why would you not be looking at using
electricity to treat that
and the other thing is i'll tell you why
when i think of electricity i think of
on and off when i think of chemistry i
think of
life-giving like
periodic table of the elements
and if there is some periodic table of
electricity where there's like 72
different kinds of electricity then
maybe that would make sense again that's
ignorance dude i fully get that i am i
do not know what the [__] i'm talking
about but in terms of why it people
would make the assumption oh
chemistry would make sense because it's
so varied whereas electricity is like
you touch it it hurts you don't touch it
you're fine like it just seems so binary
sure i think it's maybe just we're well
used to pharma you know drugs but is
there that level of variability to
electrical stimulation and that was part
of my core question like how is when you
were focused on weight loss you said you
changed the herds yeah the waveform so
the shape like so what you can change
would be things like you know the
voltage and current is obviously quite
quite an obvious one but within that you
can change the shape of the wave the
direction of the wave the polarity how
long the wave is on and off for so you
actually almost can have an infinite
amount of different kind of waveform
parameters and going in the brain or
whatever electrical system you're trying
to communicate with interprets those
things differently sure yeah so one of
the things that we now know about the
brain is is that it's very electrical
but it's also very chemical and so you
were talking about how chemistry sets
make sense periodic tables right so one
of the things we know is that
electricity when it hits the brain it
does these things with these things
called ions right so as you move along a
nerve there are these channels that open
and close and that's how what's called a
potential moves across a nerve ending
and then it has to hit the end of the
nerve ending and then the nerve has to
put some stuff in the space and then it
has to skip over some stuff is something
it could be serotonin it could be
norepinephrine it could be a whole host
of different things depending upon the
signal where it came from and what
chemicals that it affects along the way
so once you start to understand that
what you can see is when you change the
frequency right very simple or you
change the intensity
you get you affect different cells which
will do different things
all right so let's go back to the
concept of efficiency
sure
what do you guys do to be more efficient
in your sleep um well i'll naturally be
plugging the the heads
but don't [__] are you wearing it
every day yeah so it's really simple i
mean 30 minutes to the device i said
we'll work for an hour but we're
recommending 30 minutes basically every
night or as often as you can before you
go to bed what time do you go to bed
well
sometimes it varies so anywhere from
maybe like 10 to 1am now why does it
vary so much uh travel yeah so the only
real um kind of regular thing as i say
is around sort of 4 or 5 p.m try and cut
out the caffeine
and then actually kind of switch try and
switch off basically um the reason that
is difficult for me because i'm in the
uk and what time do you try to switch
off um after dinner so that's maybe like
5 6 p.m oh wow um so you for four to
five hours you're just like in chill
mode trying trying because what i've
noticed is that being kind of active
post dinner has started to push me back
and back and back which is why then you
know it's like 1 1 a.m 2 a.m
multiply that by traveling and jet lag
and it just becomes a mess and what do
you do to unwind
um maybe just relax chill go a walk yeah
just like i'm not very impressed with
this guy's routine i'm not gonna lie
so
different strokes for different folks my
friend yeah all right let's hear yours
so i'm very i'm dialed into this so i
have a very consistent bedtime i go to
bed at midnight i wake up at 6 17
whether i like it or not i stop caffeine
by 2 pm every single day
i stop alcohol roughly three hours
before bed if i'm drinking i'm not that
big of a drinker to be fair um i don't
exercise in the evenings i usually
exercise based on my chronotype um
around 10 30 11 o'clock in the mornings
and that actually helps me out quite a
bit
and then when i wake up in the mornings
i get 15 minutes of sunlight and i drink
a bottle of water that's what i do and
it works
that's a routine
yeah that all makes sense so talk to me
about the the light exposure thing which
i think is really interesting so i found
this i was recently in tokyo okay and i
don't normally experience jet lag and
the first day that i got there i woke up
so rough i was like whoa i feel like 10
pounds of ass and so i was like okay i
know about daylight so i'm gonna go sit
outside in daylight and i'm talking
i'm not joking 90 seconds into the
sunlight i started to feel
radically different yeah so sunlight so
here's the science behind it sunlight
specifically blue light which is part of
the spectrum of sunlight
it's about 450 to about 480 nanometers
that actually hits a particular cell in
your eye called the melanopsin cell
which turns off the melatonin faucet in
your brain so if you're feeling like ass
waking up in the morning the likelihood
is especially if you just got to tokyo
is your melatonin faucet is still on
okay so
looking at the light seeing the light
that kind of thing matters and also
there are now light bulbs that are made
conversely available that have a filter
inside them so they can filter out the
blue light they're are blue light
blocking glasses that can be very
helpful look i tell people all the time
i think i'm the only sleep doctor in the
universe that says it's okay to fall
asleep with the television on that's
interesting i've got people who need to
watch the simpsons to fall asleep that's
just what they need to do it's amazing
if you turn it off they're up all night
like it doesn't make any sense why would
i recommend them to stop doing something
that's effectively working for them and
by the way having a television on in
your room in the evening there's these
things called television timers they're
built into 99 of televisions today set
the [__] timer and go to bed
so
um
when it comes to
rebalancing through nature right
i heard you talk about this and i
thought that it was really interesting
so i'm not a forest bather i'm far more
of a city bather
my idea of like the i can finally relax
would be in tokyo um but i actually do
get the whole notion of getting in
rhythm with absolutely nature what do
you have people do and i'd really like
to hear about the nature rebalancing so
there was a great study that was done
they took 20 insomniacs they brought
them into the woods kept them there for
two weeks lo and behold at the end of
the two weeks almost none of them had
insomnia anymore right so there's lots
of different ideas as to what helped
what hurt things like that i would argue
that the
lack of
external crazy stimulation lights on
cars noises all of that was helpful but
i think they just entrained themselves
to the sun going up in the sun going
down i mean let's be fair very little
insomnia ever occurred before the
electric light bulb
okay so if edison did anything he [__]
up people's sleep forever because
there's all these other things that you
can now do because we have the presence
of light consistently in the evenings
and so
in training yourself to the natural
cycle would be great but let's be fair
people aren't walking into the woods for
two or three weeks to fix their sleep so
then what can we do along the way and
how do we help these people with
insomnia the biggest problem is between
your ears right every single patient
that i talk to they say dr bruce i can't
turn off my brain
right that's not a surrounding problem
that doesn't have anything to do with
blue light that has to do with our
inability to slow down that has to do
with our inability to deal with stress
so things like cognitive behavioral
therapy are highly effective for these
people
so
cognitive behavioral therapy is a two
component process for insomnia so
we know that insomnia is what we call
psychophysiologic insomnia so psycho
being something going on in the head
physiology in the body so what we do is
we create schedules for people when
should you go to bed and when should you
wake up and that's part one of the
therapy and to be fair we actually
restrict their sleep you would like that
because you don't like sleep right and
so what we do is we tell them if you
normally go to bed at 11 and you don't
fall asleep until one don't get in bed
until one because all you're going to do
is lie there and be pissed off anyway
right so we restrict their sleep we
build up their sleep deprivation on
purpose
because we want that natural sleep
deprivation to help them fall asleep and
stay asleep if that doesn't work then we
go to the cognitive portion the
cognitive portion is what do you think
about sleep a lot of people say well if
i don't get eight hours it's gonna peel
you know years off the back end of my
life there's no data to show that
none
so what i do is we take all these
dysfunctional thoughts
and we ask the patients what are you
thinking about sleep and we get them to
rate them and then we give them the
facts 90 of the time they just don't
know the facts right it's my job to
educate as many people as i possibly can
about what sleep really is and how sleep
really works and why it's so important
and once we start educating people on
that
it all falls into place i've rarely had
anybody turn to me who i've done full-on
cognitive behavioral therapy on and been
unsuccessful if they've done all the
things and if they've paid attention and
if they've done it it's really pretty
effective more effective than sleeping
pills so the cbt is specifically like
pattern interrupts so you're
catastrophizing and you have to have a
way to one recognize that you're
catastrophizing two interrupt it
so is it specifically
a narrative around sleep or do you find
that they have narratives around all
kinds of things that you're helping them
interrupt so as clinical psychologists
um i always find more there than just
sleep um more times than not to be
honest with you when somebody isn't
sleeping well
it's pretty much a picture into
something else that's going on in their
life
right i mean look i don't have sleep
problems generally speaking people
always wondered is that how you got into
the field no it isn't but if something's
going on with my daughter or my son i
don't [__] sleep well
right like that's a big deal to me and
so everybody is going to have those
instances in their lives where those
types of things occur right
if they get less sleep than they need
however we figured that out sure does
that lead to negative long-term life
expectancy well it's hard to test that
but what i can tell you that it does
lead to is it absolutely leads to things
like cardiovascular disease dementia i
mean it leads to a lot of [__] you don't
want
um chronic sleep deprivation has
system-wide effects
sleep affects every organ system and
every disease state let's be very clear
here cancer cells multiply faster the
more sleep deprived you are
right so not every situation is the same
right if i have a patient who's getting
chemotherapy done
they're going to have a very different
sleep schedule than if i'm working with
a professional athlete
right sleep is individual and the
biggest thing that i want people to
remember is sleep is healing
that's what our body does in sleep it
heals physically and it heals mentally
so it's it's interesting to me that you
hate sleep because it's the thing that's
going to get you the furthest and the
longest yeah so the my relationship with
sleep goes like this i prioritize it it
is the most important thing for me to
get in terms of my wellness schedule my
wellness regime the one thing i don't
[__] with sleep which is why i don't set
an alarm
do i wish that nature in its infinite
wisdom mr mckeon do i wish that it had
figured out something through evolution
so that we didn't need it yes
do i
admire the dolphins for sleeping one
hemisphere at a time yes
do i recognize that being tired is a
unique form of torture yes
so i have no interest in sleep
deprivation
i don't get it i make sure i get my
sleep
my thing is much like we've been talking
about here with sleep efficiency i
believe in you know the
that if you shorten the amount of time
that you sleep you will become less
efficient and you will actually get less
done than you would just by clocking the
hours getting the sleep that you need
and moving forward but i do think also
about longevity and so
if there is something to look cleaning
the glymphatic system
it just takes a certain number of hours
and you need to do it and that's just
that because i do worry in my own life
that i am betraying this is a true
statement i am betraying myself and my
desire to live forever by the way i live
my life which is at a thousand miles an
hour every day but it's going to be a
u-shaped curve in it in a way you know
well you so there's the benefit actually
doesn't go on and on forever so sleep
yourself yeah well there's two well
let's say increasing or decreasing your
sleep there's going to be an optimal
point right so you know your conflict is
you want more hours in your day because
you want to do really great things
but you can't do really great things if
you're tired and you do need a certain
amount of sleep so yes you can peel it
back so so what we're you know i think
it's quite clear we're not saying you
must get ers right you should try and
find the optimum amount for you if that
shortens it down and you six hours is
great for you then you have an extra two
hours in your day if you then keep
pushing and pushing and pushing and go
down to like four hours those two hours
are not going to be your best
performance and it's probably going to
actually affect the other hours in the
day so there's a benefit where you can
come down but at some point you just
can't keep scraping off hours and hours
and hours and i would also argue that
this technology has potential to
actually help people lower the amount of
total sleep that they might need right
and here's and here's what i'm saying
that runs contrary with my experience
with it so what how if if i were using
it more
so here's where i'm going with it so the
current state of your technology as
you've described it is that you wear it
for 30 minutes before bed and helps you
fall asleep faster we get people get
higher quality sleep and they actually
get more sleep if i remember correctly
that was my experience right so here's
where it gets interesting is what
happens to those people over a year
right how does it get more and more
efficient and by the way if you make
people fall asleep faster
guess what they're
they're becoming more efficient
right
have you noticed that you guys have been
tracking people for a while now um have
are people finding that over time that
their sleep actually re-sort of
calibrates and it becomes more efficient
they're getting less because i actually
stopped using it because i didn't want
to keep sleeping the extra hour yeah
yeah so um
initially so just to suppose highlight
for everyone this was our initial device
for trying to suppress appetite and as a
side effect we started getting lots of
people reporting literally the first
thing i noticed i was like jason what
the [__] are you doing to me yeah
yeah so my side effect the nights i must
say is quite dismissive of this at the
start because it was like as maybe like
oh people aren't sure and maybe they are
sleeping and then actually you know more
and more and more and more it's the same
thing every time i fall asleep really
quickly i don't waken up during the
night and actually my sleep is longer i
sleep right through and then when i
waken up i feel really refreshed and at
that point we started looking at it and
there's all this kind of disjointed
effort across like animal studies and
human studies and it was like this
frequency kind of does this and this
frequency affects your deep sleep and
your n-rem sleep
and then the moist studies actually if
you remove the vestibular system
circadian rhythm just goes crazy
so actually we started then placing all
this together and actually find a
frequency which we thought would be
optimum for improving someone's sleep uh
interestingly and another mouse people
come out pretty much looking at the cm
frequency and the human study came out
where they they actually made the bed
sort of rock side to side at the same
frequency so a lot of people think your
vestibular system is just a sense of
balance you know people say your inner
ear and that that's it's kind of
dismissive okay but to give a picture of
how important that it is there are only
there are 12 cranial nerves they're what
they're called they are not in the
spinal cords all the nerves all the
neurons that are in your brain that they
go down to your toes they all go down
the spinal cord bar bar 12. um 10 of
those connect directly to your brain
stem the vagus is one of them it's a
very important nerve the vestibular
system as i say people say it's your
sense of balance your vestibular system
is one of the other nine nerves it is an
entire sensory input that goes right
into the brainstem it actually overlaps
with the vagus when you stimulate the
vestibular system you get vagus nerve
neurons firing
so it is far from this little sort of
sense of balance that kind of lets you
know if you're going to tip over it is a
massive factor into the sensory input of
the brain stem and the hypothalamus and
what it is actually doing amongst other
things is letting your brain know how
physically active your body is both
acute and chronic right and that is
really important information for your
brain to know when it is regulating what
your body does
yeah that's super interesting
knowing how deeply you've gone into
sleep now what's the most surprising
thing that you came across
uh maybe just the architecture i'm like
but i mean we've went into that in great
detail i mean that is amazing it's a bit
of a symphony in a way you know how it
all works and actually you know the the
various stages and your your deep sleep
tends to be at the early stage and
actually as it shrinks and you get more
and more ram so this this sort of cycle
after cycle after cycle so it's not a
case or what i found really interesting
was it's not a case if you miss like say
two hours of your sleep that it's just
you just missed a proportion depending
on where you've actually missed that you
could have totally disrupted your sleep
so if you missed the two hours at the
start you might have wiped out like 80
percent of your deep sleep or if you're
waking up two hours early you've wiped
out all of your rem sleep you know it's
not it's not just a case of my head's on
the pillow and the next ers are all the
same it's actually this as i say
symphony of kind of neural activity that
goes from almost nothing to your brain
might might as well be a whack
although you are totally you know
paralyzed and unconscious i mean that is
a beautiful thing although totally kind
of scary and amazing
agreed is there anything in your many
years of researching sleep that really
took you by surprise
you know
i'll tell you what took me by surprise
is that two years ago the nobel prize
was given to circadian researchers
really that was [__] cool what'd they
learn so it's it's actually a pretty
complicated process but basically had to
do with circadian rhythmicity and the
ability to turn on and off mitochondria
which was actually kind of amazing but
when you start to think through the idea
of sleep and sleep research like i read
sleep research every day there's
literally 15 to 20 studies that come out
per month in this area
you look at medical research people have
been studying medicine since hippocrates
right thousands of years the first sleep
lab was in 1940s wow right so we're at
the precipice we're at the very
beginning with like the sperm and egg
stage of what is sleep and what's going
to happen with it and
lately my most my biggest interest
lately has actually been about cannabis
in sleep
i would argue that um ambien is going to
have a really big competitor um it's
called weed and it's out and it's
recreational in a couple of states i
live in you know california and it's
very very interesting smoke
sure interesting absolutely what do you
find that it does to your sleep so it
depends on when you smoke it what you
smoke and how much you smoke so it's all
there's a lot of different things out
there but i've written extensively about
if you're going to use marijuana to help
you sleep what should you look for
i've also broken down the cannabinoids
so a lot of people out there talking
about cbd cbd cbd right let me be clear
you'd have to have almost 200 milligrams
of cbd to have any effect on sleep much
lower dosage to help with pain you want
cbn
okay cbn which turns out to be oxidized
thc helps with sleep much more at least
that's what the data would suggest so
how does one oxidize thc you let weed
lie around for a little while and it's
basically cbn is old weed
now to be fair people are learning how
to process it and make that process move
quicker but what we're starting to see
is now we're starting to see cannabis
like if you go into a cannabis
dispensary and you say what have you got
for sleep they have a section
right like when people my age 50 51
years old are walking into a dispensary
we're not going there to get high we're
going there because we got pain we have
sleep issues and we want to use the
medicine
right that's where the gold is and so
when you start to really look at it like
let's treat it like a medicine let's
look at it in a way that can be helpful
i mean we have an entire endocannabinoid
system in our body that isn't being used
except for with cannabinoids so and also
to be fair cannabinoids are in many
other things besides marijuana but
they're really in marijuana so why
shouldn't we start to walk down that
path create that technology and help
more people all right so you've said
that if you're going to drink alcohol
stop three hours before bed what's the
protocol with weed so i think it's going
to be different and to be honest with
you i don't think i know yet um it's
definitely something that i'm studying
and i'm learning more more and more
about but i would argue that the
tinctures like the the liquid that comes
in the droppers that you can do
sublingually i would say that would be a
place to start i haven't heard of that
oh you just drop it under your tongue
yeah you just take it drop it underneath
your tongue let it sit there 60 seconds
swallow it close your eyes
very interesting this whole subject to
me is is it's pretty cool incredibly
interesting it's so important as
somebody obsessed with efficiency and
productivity it's like
man if you're not paying attention to
your sleep you're you're really really
in trouble
um where can people and jason i'll start
with you where can people learn more
about modius sleep
what's that sort of parting message you
want them to check out
yeah so just really high level what
we're trying to do then is
non-invasively influenced the brain stem
so the the shift in that whole
technology is can you actually make it
non-invasive or less invasive or if
possible non-invasive we as i say focus
on the vestibular nerve uh because it's
entirely non-invasive the first device
was based around can helping you lose
weight by suppressing your appetite
control and hypothalamus that way uh but
now i said the modius sleep device uh we
have just launched to try and help
people improve their sleep so we're on
indiegogo you can check it out you can
go to buddhist murray's hill for
mother's sleep you can check it out but
if you have some issues with your sleep
i really recommend that you try it and
dr jason mckeon so yeah you can check me
out on twitter all right there we go
dr bruce where can people find you
thesleepdoctor.com and then it's the
same on all the social properties so the
sleep doctor on facebook twitter
instagram linkedin nice very cool and
then final question for you amazing
gentlemen
what is one thing you would have people
change that would have the biggest
impact on their health
jason we'll start with you well the
obvious thing is just to try and get on
top of your sleep and but but don't
misread that as and i think we've
covered this pretty well do not misread
that is i need x amount hours of sleep
look at your sleep look at what sleep
you need and look about how you can make
that more efficient it is the single
most in my opinion most important thing
that you could do easily which will have
a really positive impact as we discussed
in like literally every organ in your
body it reduces your risks just of so
many comorbidities for someone who wants
to be and a lot of your listeners are
going to try and looking at high
performance output if you are not
managing your sleep it is crazy to think
that you can run the optimum efficiency
all right so i'll slightly change it for
you because i imagine your answer is
going to be something to do with sleep
if it is what is the one thing people
should do that would have the biggest
impact on their sleep know your
chronotype without question it's super
easy go to chronoquiz.com it's my
website
you'll learn in 30 questions what your
chronotype is and then you can figure
out i mean in my book i tell people the
best time to have sex eat a cheeseburger
ask your boss for a raise and sleep so
it's useful in all facets of life nice
it's a great place to leave you all
guys sleep man i'm telling you get it it
is the number one thing people are
always asking me uh trying to accomplish
as much as i'm trying to accomplish if i
set an alarm in fact i stopped posting
about how early i wake up because people
were getting the wrong idea they thought
that i was setting alarm to wake up at
three which i do not
get your sleep and if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential
you